X. THE ESSENTIAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MATRIX OF THE TATHĀGATA

§1. The Saying: All Living Beings are Pośeśed of the Matrix of the Tathāgata is the Highest Logical Truth.) Now, this Mat
rix of the Tathāgata, being united with the Absolute Body, having the characteristics inseparable from Reality, and bein
g of the nature of the germ properly fixed [towards the attainment of the Buddhahood], exists everywhere, at whatever ti
me and without exception among the living beings, this is indeed to be perceived in the light of the Absolute Essence as
the [highest] logical ground.It is said: “O noble youth, such is the Essential nature of the elements. Whether the Tath
āgatas appear in this world, or whether they do not, these living beings are always possessed of the Matrix of the Tathā
gata”.That which is meant by this ‘Essential nature’ is here synonymous for the ‘argument’, the mode of proof and the me
ans [of cognition], in the sense: such is the real state of things and not otherwise. In any case only the Absolute Esse
nce is the resort for the contemplation of the mind, only the Absolute Essence is the argument for the proper understand
ing of the mind. This Essence itself is not accessible to imagination nor to discrimination. It is accessible only to fa
ith.

(§2. The Kinds of Individuals to Whom the Faith in this Essence is Necessary.) The Highest Truth of the Buddhas Can be un
derstood only by faith, Indeed, the eyeless one cannot see The blazing disk of the sun. || 53 ||

In brief, there are four kinds of individuals who are defined as being blind with regard to the perception of the Matrix 
of the Tathāgata. Who are these four? They are namely: 1) the ordinary beings; 2) the Śrāvakas; 3) the Pratyekabuddhas; 
and 4) the Bodhisattvas who have recently entered the Vehicle.It is said: “O Lord, the Matrix of the Tathāgata is not th
e accessible sphere for those who have fallen into the erroneous conception maintaining the existence of individuality, 
for those who are attached to delusion, and for those whose mind has deviated from the conception of Non-substantiality”
.Here, ‘those who have fallen into the erroneous conception maintaining the existence of individuality’ are the ordinary
beings. Indeed, having fully admitted those elements claśified into [5] groups and others, which are possessed of Evil 
Influences, as being the real Ego and its belongings, they are clinging to the conception of ‘Ego’ and, ‘Mine’, and, due
to this conception, they cannot believe even in the Immaculate Essence which represents the annihilation of the [concep
tion of the] existence of real individuality.Being so, how is it pośible for them to cognize the Matrix of the Tathāgata
which is the object accessible only to the Omniscient? There is [absolutely] no room for it. Now ‘those who are attache
d to delusion’ represent 2) the Śrāvakas and 3) the Pratyekabuddhas. Why?Because, although the Matrix of the Tathāgata i
s to be considered as ‘eternal’ in its transcendental sense, they indulge in the contemplation of the ‘evanescence’ [of 
the phenomena 30)] instead of meditating upon the ‘eternity’ of the former. Likewise, although the Matrix of the Tathāga
ta is to be considered as ‘blissful’ in its transcendental sense, still they indulge in the contemplation of the ‘suffer
ing’ [of the phenomena] instead of meditating upon the ‘bliś’ of the former.Although the Matrix of the Tathāgata is to b
e regarded as ‘the [highest] Unity’ they nevertheless cling to the practice of meditation on the idea of ‘non-Ego’ [of t
he separate elements] instead of concentrating their mind on the notion of the Unity of the former. And, though the Matr
ix of the Tathāgata is to be considered as ‘pure’ in the transcendental sense, they devote themselves to the practice of
meditation on the notion of the ‘impurity’ [of the Phenomenal World] without doing meditation on ‘Purity’ of the former
.Thus, in such a way, all the Śrāvakas and Pratyekabuddhas are attached to the Path which is quite opposite to the reali
zation of the Absolute Body, and hence the Essence [of the Tathāgata] which is characterized as the Supreme Eternity, th
e Supreme Bliss, the Supreme Unity, and the Supreme Purity, is said not to be accessible to them, too.About this inacces
sibility of the Essence to those who are attached to delusion, i.e. who have the notion of Evenescence, Suffering, Imper
sonality and Impurity [as the almighty maximum], the Lord has made it clear in detail in the Mahāparinirvāṇa-sūtra with 
the example of a jewel in the water of a pond.

It runs as follows: “Suppose, for instance, O monks, that in the hot season, the people, putting on the bathing underwear
, were playing in the water with various ornaments and equipments for their individual pastime. Suppose then, someone wo
uld cast into the water the genuine Vaiḍūrya stone. Thus, in order to get this Vaiḍūrya stone, all the people, leaving a
side their ornaments, would dive into the water.They would mistake pebbles and gravels in the pond for the real jewel, s
eize them and draw them out, thinking: I have got a jewel. After having stood on the bank of the pond, they would notice
: It is not the real jewel at all! At that moment, the water of that pond would, owing to the power of that jewel, shine
as if water itself were shining, and seeing that water sparkling, they would say: O the jewel is still there [in the wa
ter], and would notice how that jewel had great quality.Thereafter, one who is experienced and clever would really get t
he jewel out. In the same way, O brethren, ye who are ignorant of the real Essence of things, maintaining the general co
nception that all things are evanescent, that there is only suffering, and that everything is impersonal and impure, pra
ctise the meditation [on that conception] repeatedly, and increasingly. But all that was attempted by you, [ye should ke
ep in mind], is [in reality] of no use.Therefore, O monks, ye should become skilful in order not to be determined by thi
s [false conception] like the pebbles and gravels in the pond. O monks, with those elements which ye maintain to be in e
very case evanescent, suffering, impersonal, and impure, and on which ye practise the meditation [on that notion] repeat
edly and increasingly, there exists [an Essence which represents] the Eternity, the Bliss, the Purity, and the Highest U
nity”. Thus should be understood in detail, according to the Scripture, the teaching of the incorrectness with regard to
the feature of the highest true nature of the elements.

Lastly, ‘those whose mind has deviated from the conception of Non-substantiality’ denotes the Bodhisattvas who have recen
tly entered the Vehicle, [since] they are deprived of [the cognition of] the Matrix of the Tathāgata in regard to the tr
ue meaning of Non-substantiality.They are the people who look toward Non-substantiality as the medium of Liberation in o
rder to destroy the substance, thinking that the perfect Nirvāṇa means the Extinction, i.e. the destruction of the eleme
nts [for the Phenomenal Existence] in future.There are also some people among them who think that there is something sub
stantial called ‘the Non-substantiality’ which is quite different from ‘form’ and other [elements], and that is the one 
which we should understand, upon which we should meditate, and, fancying Non-substantiality in this way, they are persua
ded of Non-substantiality.

(§3. The True Conception of the Matrix of the Tathāgata as Representing Non-substantiality.) Then how is what is called h
ere ‘[the cognition of] the Matrix of the Tathāgata in regard to the true meaning of Non-substantiality’? Here there is 
nothing to be removed And absolutely nothing to be added; The Truth should be perceived as it is, And he who sees the Tr
uth becomes liberated. || 154 ||The Essence [of the Buddha] is [by nature] devoid Of the accidental [pollutions] which d
iffer from it; But it is by no means devoid of the highest properties Which are, Essentially, indivisible from it. || 15
5 ||

What is explained by this? There is no defiling element which is to be removed from this Essence of the Tathāgata, perfec
tly purified by nature, since it is by nature devoid of accidental pollutions. Also, there is no purifying element which
is to be added to it, since it is by nature indivisible from the pure properties [of the Buddha].On account of this poi
nt, it is said [in the Scripture]: “The Matrix of the Tathāgata is devoid of all the sheath of Defilements which are dif
ferentiated and separated [from the Absolute Essence]. The Matrix of the Tathāgata is by no means devoid of the Buddha’s
Properties which are indivisible, inseparable [from the Absolute Essence], inconceivable and far beyond the sands of th
e Gaṅgā in number”.Thus, wherever something is lacking, this is observed as ‘void’ in that place, whatever remains there
, one knows that this being must exist here: This is really the true [conception of Non-substantioality]. [Thus], by rem
oving the extremities of affirmation and negation, the real characteristic of Non-substantiality is explained by these t
wo verses.Now, those individuals whose mind has deviated from this principle of Non-substantiality, and, turning in vari
ous directions, neither meditates nor concentrates upon it, we call them by this very reason ‘those whose mind has devia
ted from [the true conception of] Non-substantiality. Indeed, without the introduction to the knowledge of the highest t
ruth of Non-substantiality, nobody can attain or realize the non-discriminative Sphere [of the Tathāgata].Implying this 
point, it has been said: “The Wisdom cognizing the Matrix of the Tathāgata is nothing but the Wisdom about Non-substanti
ality of the Buddhas. And this Matrix of the Tathāgata has never been seen, has never been realized by the Śrāvakas and 
the Pratyekabuddhas” &c.Now, this Matrix of the Tathāgata, inasmuch as it represents the Matrix of the Absolute Essence,
is said to be a sphere not accessible to ‘those who have fallen into the erroneous conception maintaining the existence
of individuality’, because the Absolute Essence is an antidote against such erroneous conception.Inasmuch as it represe
nts the Matrix of the Absolute Body, or the Matrix of the Transcendental Element, it is said not to be accessible to ‘th
ose who are attached to delusion’ since the Transcendental Element is spoken of as being an antidote against the mundane
elements of such nature as evanescence, etc.[Furthermore], inasmuch as it represents the Matrix of the properties, perf
ectly pure by nature, [the Matrix of the Tathāgata] is said not to be accessible to ‘those whose mind has deviated from 
Non-substantiality’ since the [Buddha’s] pure virtuous Properties, being represented by the Transcendental Absolute Body
which is indivisible from them, are by nature devoid of accidental pollutions.Here, to perceive that the Transcendental
Absolute Body is perfectly pure by nature, by means of the cognition of the unique introduction to the Wisdom which is 
Essentially connected with the Absolute Essence, implies here the True Intuition. On account of this perception, it is s
aid that [even] those Bodhisattvas who are abiding in their 10 Stages can [but] slightly understand the Matrix of the Ta
thāgata.Indeed, thus it is said: “[ O Lord], thou art unable to be seen fully, Just as here the sun, in the sky with tor
n clouds, Even by the Saints, of pure intellectual vision, Since their intellect is still partial; O Lord, only those wh
ose Wisdom is illimitable Can completely perceive thy Absolute Body Which pervades everything knowable That is infinite 
like space”.

