I. Introduction

The Buddha, the doctrine, and the community, The Essence [of the Buddha], the Supreme Enlightenment, The Virtuous Qualiti
es [of the Buddha]; - These are the Admantine Subjects, [which show] Briefly, the body of the whole text.

The word ‘vajrapada’ (admantine subject) means the term, i.e. the basis, which expresses the meaning of the Enlightenment
which is similar to a thunderbolt [or diamond]. Here, it being difficult to be penetrated by the knowledge consisting i
n studying and thinking, the meaning [of the Enlightenment] which is not capable of being explained but is to be realize
d by oneself, should be understood as ‘like a thunderbolt’.Those letters, which express that meaning by making manifest 
the way which is favorable for its acquisition, are called ‘pada’, just because they are the basis of that meaning. Thus
, by both meanings, i.e. being hard to be penetrated and being the basis, the character of ‘vajrapada’, of the meaning a
s well as of the letters, is to be understood.Now, what is ‘artha’, (the meaning) and what is ‘vyañjana’ (the letter)? ‘
artha’ is the sevenfold meaning of the Enlightenment, viz. 1) the Buddha, 2) the Doctrine, 3) the Community, 4) the Esse
nce of the Buddha, 5) the Supreme Enlightenment, 6) The Virtuous Qualities of the Buddha, and 7) the Acts of the Buddha.
These are called ‘artha’.The letters, by which the sevenfold meaning of the Enlightenment is indicated or is manifested
, are called ‘vyañjana’. And this teaching of ‘vajrapada’ should be understood in detail according to the Sūtras.

1) ‘Buddha’: “Verily, O Ānanda, invisible is the Tathāgata. He cannot be seen by eyes”. 2) ‘Dharma’: “Verily, O Ānanda, u
nutterable is the Doctrine. It cannot be heard by ears”. 3) ‘Saṃgha’: “Verily, O Ānanda, the Holy Community is of an imm
utable character. It cannot be comletely served, either by body or by mind”. These are the [first] three vajrapadas, whi
ch are to be understood according to the Dṛḍādhyāśaya-parivarta.‘Dhātu’: “Verily, O Śāriputra, this meaning is the subje
ct for the Tathāgata [and only belongs to] the sphere of the Tathāgata. This meaning, O Śāriputra, can neither be known 
nor be seen, nor be examined correctly through the knowledge of the Śrāvakas and the Pratyekabuddhas. Needless to say, t
his applies to the case of ignorant and ordinary beings, except when they have faith in the Tathāgata. O Śāriputra, the 
ultimate Truth is really approachable only by faith [in the Tathāhata]. O Śāriputra, the ultimate Truth is a synonym of 
the mass of living beings.The mass of living beings is, O Śāriputra, nothing but a synonym of the Matrix of the Tathāgat
a. The Matrix of the Tathāgata is, O Śāriputra, nothing but a synonym of the Absolute Body”. Thus is the forth ‘vajrapad
a’ and is to be understood according to the Anūnatvāpūrṇatvanirdeśa-parivarta.

‘Bodhi’: “O Lord, the Supreme Perfect Enlightenment is a synonym of the Sphere of the Nirvāṇa. Sphere of the Nirvāṇa is n
othing but a synonym of the Absolute Body of the Tathāgata”. Thus is the fifth Vajrapada which is to be understood accor
ding to the Ārya Śrīmālā-sūtra.

‘Guṇa’: “O Śāriputra, that which is called Absolute Body, preached by the Tathāgata, is of indivisible nature, of qualiti
es inseparable from the Wisdom, that is to say, [indivisible from or endowed] with the properties of the Buddha which fa
r surpass the particles of sands of the Gaṅgā in number”. This is the sixth Varjrapada and is to be understood according
to the Anūnatvāpūrṇatvanirdeśa.

‘Karman’: “O Mañjuśri, the Tathāgata never imagines anything nor distinguishes falsely. That is to say, his acts of this 
kind flow forth without any effort, without any imagination or any thought construction”. This is the seventh Vajrapada 
which is to be understood according to the Tathāgataguṇajñānācintyaviṣayāvatāranirdeśa. In short, these are the Vajrapad
as which should be known as the body of this whole text, in the sense of being a collection of preliminary explanations.

(The Essential Character of the subjects.) Of these [seven subjects], Accompanied by their own characteristics, one shoul
d know respectively the first three subjects From the introductory chapter in the Dhāraṇirājasūtra And the [latter] four
from [the chapter on] the distinction] Between the qualities of the Bodhisattva and those of the Buddha || 2x ||

[the meaning of this verse is as follows]: And of these seven Vajrapadas, accompanied by the explanation of their own cha
racteristics, the three subjects should be known as being from the introductory chapter (nidāna-parivarta) of the Holy D
hāraṇīśvararājasūtra, and then the remaining four [are to be known] from the chapter on the distinction between the qual
ities of the Bodhisattva and those of the Buddha respectively. Therefore, it is said:

“The Lord has has perfectly realized the equality of all things, has set the wheel of Doctrine going well and has kindly 
trained numberless disciples”.By these three fundamental sentences, respectively, one should know the arrangement of the
three Jewels [in the aspect of] their successive origination and accomplishment. The remaining four subjects are to be 
known as the statement of the accomplishment of the causes which correspond to the origin of the three Jewels.Now, on th
e 8th Stage of Bodhisattva, as the power of controlling all elements of phenomena has been attained, so it is said: “He 
(=The Lord), sitting in the exellent Seat of Enlightenment, realized perfectly the equality of all things.On the 9th Sta
ge of Bodhisattva, he is endowed with the power of expressing the Highest Doctrine, knows easily the intentions of all l
iving beings, brings all faculties [of living beings] to the highest perfection and becomes an expert in the removal of 
the chain of Defiling forces in all living beings. Therefore it is said: “Having realized the perfect Enlightenment, he 
has well set the wheel of Doctrine going”.On the 10th Stage of Bodhisattva, after attaining the anoitment for the prince
recognized as the next king in the highest religious empire of the Buddha, he is immediately calmed in the Buddha’s eff
ortless acts uninterruptedly. Therefore it is said: “He who well set the wheel of Doctrine going has kindly trained numb
erless disciples”.Furthermore, the same qualification of having trained numberless disciples is shown in the same text, 
immediately after this sentence. It runs as follows: “He was together with the assembly of a large number of monks, and 
with the assembly of numberless Bodhisattvas”.As he has well trained those who are in the enlightenment of the Śrāvaka a
nd up to that of the Buddha, step by step, it is said: “Thus being endowed with the virtuous qualities,...” &c.

And then immediately after the [passage of the] doctrine on the nature of qualities of Śrāvakas and Bodhisattvas, in the 
reference to the Buddha’s inconceivable leadership in regard to tranquility, the establishment of the distinguishable qu
alities of the Jewel of the Buddha is known to be through the accomplishment of the great palace adorned with circular o
rnament of jewels, through bringing his people together into the assembly of Tathāgatas, through the completion of vario
us kinds of worship with divine beings, and through the pouring of rain from the cloud of praises.And next, through the 
splendid arrangement of the seat of the Doctrine and its brightness, and through the glorification of the name and quali
ties of the various doctrines, there should be known the establishment of the distinguishable qualities of the Jewel of 
the Doctrine.And next, in the light of the mutual manifestation of the power of the acting sphere of various tranquiliti
es of the Bodhisattvas, and in the light of the description of their various forms of qualities, there should be known t
he establishment of the distinguishable qualities of the Jewel of the Community.And again, immediately after this, in th
e reference to the Buddha’s presentation of the highest fearlessness and confidence [in speech] on account of the prince
of the supreme religious king [to the Bodhisattvas], through the sprinkling of the Buddha’s light. And through the expl
anation of the highest praise to the true virtues of the Tathāgata,through the description in the form of discussion of 
the highest Doctrine of the Great Vehicle, and, as the result of that knowledge, and through the manifestation of the at
tainment of the highest sovereignty; through these three, respectively, the highest establishment of the distinguishable
qualities of three Jewels is to be understood.

And also therein the introductory chapter of this Sūtra, The Essence of the Buddha is explained by a description of the s
ixtyfold appliance as the purifying factors of that Essence. Because the Essence of the Buddha deserves to be applied th
e purification, in so far as it has qualities of an object to be purified.And because of the effect of this meaning, in 
the 10 Stages of Bodhisattva, there is illustrated again an analogy of the purifying process of gold. In this Sūtra (the
Dhāraṇirāja-sūtra) too, after the description of the Acts of the Buddha, the allegory of unpurified Vaiḍūrya stone is i
llustrated.

It runs as follows: “O noble youth, take for instance a skilful jewel-maker who knows quite well how to purify precious s
tones. Having taken out an unpurified precious stone from the mine, and having washed it with acid salt water, he then p
olishes it by rubbing with blackhair cloth.But with this much work, he never ceases to make efforts. After that, having 
washed the stone with meat juice of bitter taste, he polishes it by rubbing with a woollen blanket.Even with this much w
ork, he never ceases to make efforts. After that, having washed it with great medical liquid, he polishes it with closel
y-woven cotton cloth. After having been polished and having been separated from all impure metals mingled with it, it is
called a precious Vaiḍūrya stone.Similarly, O noble youth, the Tathāgata too, having known the unpurified element of li
ving beings, creates disgust in the mind of those living beings who are attached to the world of transmigration through 
the teaching of being afraid of the non-eternity, suffering, impersonality and impurity [of this world], and causes them
to enter the discipline of the sacred Doctrine.After that, he makes them realize the guiding manner of the Tathāgata by
the teaching of [the threefold gate to the emancipation, viz.] non-substantiality, non-distinction and desirelessness.E
ven with this much of act, the Tathāgata never ceases to make efforts. After that, through the teaching of the irreversi
ble wheel of the Doctrine and through the teaching of the ‘purification of three circles’, he causes those living beings
who have different kinds of characteristics and origins, to enter the sphere of the Tathāgata. Having entered [the sphe
re of the Tathāgata], those same beings, when they have realized the true nature of the Tathāgata, are called unparallel
ed venerables”.Having in view this Essence of the Tathāgata, which is of pure origin, it is said as follows:

“Just as gold, though it is invisible among stones and sands, Comes to be seen by the process of purification, Similarly,
in this world of living beings The Tathāgata [becomes visible by purification]“.

Now, which are the sixty fold factors of purifying process of the Essence of Buddhahood? They are, namely, (1) kinds of o
rnament of Bodhisattvas, (2) 8 kinds of illumination of Bodhisattvas, (3) 16 kinds of Bodhisattva’s great Compassion, an
d (4) 32 kinds of Bodhisattva’s deeds.

Immediately after this statement, there is explained the Supreme Enlightenment of the Buddha by indicating the 16 kinds o
f Great Compassion [imparted by] the Supreme Enlightenment. Next to this description, there is explained the Buddha’s Vi
rtuous Qualities by the indication of 10 Powers, kinds of Intrepidity and 18 Exclusive Properties of the Buddha.And next
, the Acts of the Buddha are explained by the indication of 32 kinds of Supreme Acts of the Buddha. Thus, these Vajrapad
as should be understood in detail through the indication of their own characters according to the Sūtra.

(The Inherent Connection between Subjects.) And then, what is the inherent connection between these subjects? From the Bu
ddha comes the Doctrine, Owing to the Doctrine there is the Holy community, In the community exist the Matrix, which is 
The element of Wisdom, aiming at its acquisition; Its acquisition of the Wisdom is the Supreme Enlightenment, Which is e
ndowed with the Qualities, 10 Powers and others, And accompanied by altruistic Acts for all living beings. || 3 || Finis
hed [the explanation of] the relation between each subject in the text.

