II. THE JEWEL OF THE BUDDHA

Hereafter we should explain the meaning of Ślokas (basic verses). Those living beings who were lead by the Tathāgata, whi
le taking their refuge in the Tathāgata, also take refuge in the Doctrine and Community through the faith as the natural
outflow of the Reality. Therefore, first of all, there is one śloka with regard to the Jewel of The Buddha.

(Kārikā 1) I bow to the one, who has realized the Buddhahood Which has neither beginning, middle nor end, and is quiescen
t, And who, having realized himself, taught the Path, Fearless and eternal, in order to enlighten the ignorant, And who,
having in hand the excellent sword and thunderbolt Of Wisdom and Mercy, cuts in pieces all sprouts of Sufferings, And b
reaks the wall of doubts concealed In the forest of various views. || 4 ||(§1. The Eightfold Quality of the Buddhahood.)
What is shown by this [śloka]? Being immutable, free from efforts And not being dependent upon the others, [Also] Being
endowed with Wisdom, Compassion and [supernatural] Power [imparted by both], The Buddhahood has two kinds of benefit. |
| 5 ||

By this verse there has been briefly explained the Buddhahood as being contracted by eight qualities. Which are the 8 qua
lities? Namely, 1) Immutability, 2) being free from any effort, 3) Enlightenment, not dependent on others, 4) Wisdom, 5)
Compassion, 6) [supernatural] power, 7) fulfilment of self-benefit, and 8) fulfilment of benefit for others.

As having neither beginning, middle nor end by nature, It is immutable; Being the body of quiet character, It is free fro
m any effort, thus remembered by tradition. || 6 ||Being realized by oneself. It is cognizable without any help of other
s; Thus awakened in a threefold way, it is Wisdom, Because of preaching the way, it is Compassion. || 7 ||It is Power be
cause of destroying Suffering and Defilements by Wisdom and Compassion; By the first three qualities, benefit for onesel
f, And by the latter three, benefit for others [is indicated]. || 8 ||

1) asaṃskṛta: The word ‘immutable’ should be understood as being opposite to being conditioned or caused. Here ‘being con
ditioned’ means the thing, of which origination, lasting, as well as destruction are conceivable. Because of the absence
of these characteristics, the Buddhahood should be seen as having neither beginning, middle nor end, and being represen
ted as the immutable Absolute Body.2) anābhoga: It is free from efforts because all dualistic views and false discrimina
tions have ceased to exist.3) aparapratyaya_abhisaṃbodhi: It is ‘enlightened without any help of others‘ because it is r
ealized through one’s innate knowledge. Here the word ‘udaya‘ means ‘perfect enlightenment‘, in which the sense’ origina
tion’ is implied. Thus, as being Tathāgata, though it is immutable and of the characteristic of non-activity, the whole 
action of the Perfectly Enlightened One proceeds without any effort, ceaselessly and uninterruptedly as far as the world
exists.

4) Jñāna, 5) karuṇā, & 6) śakti: Thus, not having heard the Buddhahood, which is a quite marvellous and unthinkable spher
e, from somebody else, but having perfectly cognized its unutterable nature ‘by one self’, i.e. by means of self-born kn
owledge which needs no teacher, and, with respect to his comprehension, in order to enlighten the others too, who are ig
norant and blind by birth, [the Buddha] has preached the path to follow that [Buddhahood]. Therefore, [the Buddha] shoul
d be understood as being endowed with the supreme Wisdom and Compassion.The fearlessness of Path is due to its transcend
ency. The transcendency is due to its never again being turned back. With respect to their abolition of the roots of oth
ers’ Suffering and Defilement, the power of Wisdom and of Compassion of the Tathāgata, is explained by means of the exam
ples of sword and thunderbolt, respectively.Of these, the root of Suffering is, in short, one kind of origination of Ind
ividuality on the [three] existences. The root of Defilement is anything which is based on the prejudice to the individu
al existence, i. e. wrong view and doubt.Here, the Suffering, as being contracted in the Individuality, should be regard
ed as having the state of sprout because of its character of origination. As having the character of cutting it, it shou
ld be known that the Buddha’s power of both Wisdom and Compassion is illustrated by an example of sword.The Defilement, 
which is contracted in wrong view and doubt and is to be destroyed by the Path of true perception, is difficult to be un
derstood and hardly to be overcome by means of mundane knowledge. Thence, it is akin to the wall concealed by a thick fo
rest. As having the character of breaking, it should be known that Buddha’s Power of both Wisdom and Compassion is illus
trated by an example of thunderbolt.

(§2. Reference to the Jñānālokālaṅkāra-Sūtra.) Thus, the six qualities of the Tathāgata mentioned above should be underst
ood by this very order and with detailed and analytical explanation, according to the Sarvabuddhaviṣayāvatārajñānālokāla
ṃkāra-Sūtra.In that Sūtra, it is said as follows: “O Mañjuśrī, he who is of no origination or destruction is (i.e. has t
he epithets) the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the Perfectly Enlightened One”. By this, first of all, it is explained that the T
athāgata is of immutable character.And immediately after this, by nine illustrations beginning with the illustration of 
a reflection of the Indra on the surface of an immaculate Vaiḍūrya stone, with reference to this very meaning of the Tat
hāgata’s being neither originated nor destructed, it is said as follows:“Thus, Mañjuśrī, the Tathāgata, the Arhat, the P
erfectly Enlightened One neither moves nor produces any thought, neither explains in a dualistic way nor imagines falsel
y nor discriminates. He is unimaginable, indiscriminative, devoid of thinking and minding, of quiescent character, of ne
ither origination nor destruction. He cannot be seen, or heard, or smelt, or tested, or touched and has no characteristi
c remark, has neither making known nor being made known.” and so forth. Such is the explanation of various kinds of aspe
cts of quiescence.By this it is indicated that, in his own acts, all dualistic views and false discriminations have ceas
ed to exist; hence, the Tathāgata is free from efforts. After this, i.e. after the explanation of [nine] illustrations, 
there is explained by the remaining texts the Tathāgata’s perfect enlightenment realized without any help of others with
respect to all the gates to the Perfect Enlightenment of the real nature of all elements.And after this, with reference
to the Tathāgata’s 16 kinds of Enlightenment, it is said as follows: “There, O Mañjuśrī, as soon as the Tathāgata has e
nlightened all the elements of such a nature and has observed the Essential nature of all living beings as ‘impure‘ ‘not
removing stains‘ and ‘blemished‘, the Great Compassion named ‘mastery’ sets in forth on all living beings”.By this the 
Tathāgata’s pośession of Supreme Wisdom and Compassion is demonstrated. There, “all the elements of such a nature” means
‘[all the elements, having the nature] as has been said before’, i.e. the character of non-existence. “Having enlighten
ed” means ‘having known truly by means of Buddha’s non-discriminative Wisdom’.“Of [all] living beings” means ‘of those [
living beings] who are in the state of conformed [in right way], unconformed and wrongly conformed groups’. “Essential n
ature” means ‘the Matrix of the Tathāgata, which is not different from his own quality by nature’“Having observed” means
‘having perceived all kinds (i.e. impure, etc.) through the Buddha’s eye to which nothing is obscure’. “Impure” means ‘
[impure nature] of the ignorant and common people’ because of obstruction caused by Moral Defilement.“Not removing stain
s” means ‘[stainful nature] of the Śravakas and Pratyekabuddhas’ because of obstruction on account of knowable things. “
Blemished” means ‘[blemished nature] of Bodhisattvas’, because of [their] retaining [the impression of] one of both [obs
tructions]. [The Compassion is “named] mastery” because it enters well into the gates of accomplished means of training 
in various ways.“The great Compassion sets forth on all living beings”, because [the Buddha], having realized the charac
teristics of all living beings through equality, has the intention to lead [the living beings] to the acquisition of the
ir own nature.After this, i.e. having aroused the supreme Wisdom and Compassion, [the Buddha] has no relaxation of activ
ity for effectuating the setting in motion of the Wheel of unparalleled Doctrine. This [activity] should be known as ‘po
wer’ of both [Wisdom and Compassion] in regard of acting for the sake of others.7) Sva_arthasaṃpad & 8) para_arthasaṃpad
: Here, of these six qualities of the Tathāgata, according to order [the quality] connected with the first three qualiti
es, immutable, etc. is ‘the fulfilment of self-benefit’, and [the quality connected with] the remaining three, Wisdom, e
tc. is ‘the fulfilment of benefit for others’.Besides [there is another meaning]. By the word ‘Wisdom’, the fulfilment o
f self-benefit is designated, in so far as the highest, eternal and quiescent place has the character of being the basis
of his own perfect enlightenment. By the words ‘Compassion’ and ‘Power’, the fulfilment of benefit for others is design
ated, because of their character of being the basis for setting forth the Wheel of the highest and greatest Doctrine.

